College students who have examinations the subsequent day might pull an 'all-nighter' in which they sacrifice sleep for one complete night of exam preparation. A study measured the sleep habits of 111 students to see if there was a correlation between getting regular sleep and student grades. Those who skipped a night of sleep to study for a test were found to achieve lower grades than those who did not stay up. It may seem that the conclusion from this study is that 'pulling an all-nighter' will cause students to attain low grades, however that constitutes a common scientific mistake.
The mistake was to erroneously interpret the results as demonstrating cause and effect. Unfortunately for the prospects of testing causal claims about sleep deprivation and exam performance, the original study used a quasi-experimental design, where no experimental manipulation was performed. The finding indicates that getting less sleep is correlated with getting lower grades yet does not support the claim that getting less sleep causes lower grades. Correlations can only lead to conclusions about the strength of relationships between variables: we cannot use correlation alone to infer the direction of influence between the variables.
When participants are not assigned at random to different groups we cannot know, when there is a relationship between variables, whether variable A influenced variable B or vice versa; or even if variable C influenced both variables A and B. Maybe students who already tend to achieve lower grades worry more about their exams, and excessive worrying interferes with them getting enough sleep the night before their exam. Maybe there is an additional variable that we have not accounted for that is causing both poorer grades and diminished sleep. It is plausible that students who party have less time to study and sleep so they achieve lower grades and are also sleep-deprived.
When we design investigations that compare existing groups of people, such as the previous example about students pulling an all-nighter, this is called a quasi-experimental design. This resembles an experiment because participants are separated into distinct groups and compared, however the subjects are selected based on pre-existing values of a variable. Quasi-experiments are technically a subtype of correlational experimental design. In a correlational design, a whole population of individuals are studied, and the values of two (or more) variables associated with each subject in the population are measured and the correlation between them computed at the population level.
