Good scientific practice is more, of course, than an exercise in deliberate observation and the use of adequate control groups to expose and assess bias. Whether a program of research will 'pay off' by casting new light on some difficult problem or perplexing aspect of behavior will also depend on the quality of the scientist's research ideas, or hypotheses. The scientist views facts not as isolated or separate entities or events, but as meaningfully connected. The scientist's hypotheses are the starting points for approaching this sort of connectedness, by making a theoretical guess as to the significance or meaning of a given fact.
Any research project begins with selecting and narrowing the question originally asked, to make it manageable for study within the available resources. Extensive preparation is crucial. The literature should be carefully reviewed, and the task should be thought about at length. One must select the most fundamental elements that will constitute the crux of the hypotheses. A classic principle of this intellectual ruminative and winnowing process is known as Occam's razor, named after the philosopher William of Occam. The principle of Occam's razor, also called the principle of parsimony, teaches that hypotheses introduced to explain relationships should be as parsimonious as possible. We 'cut away' what is superfluous. Occam's razor is a qualified demand for prudence so that we do not overcomplicate the search for truth.
There are several kinds of hypotheses in behavioral science. A working hypothesis is a proposition, or set of propositions, that serves to guide and organize an empirical investigation. For example, social psychologist Leon Festinger, in trying to account for the fact that some earthquake victims in India spread false rumors about future catastrophes, was inspired to develop two basic hypotheses that became the starting point for an elaborate program of experimental research.
Festinger wondered why those rumors arose and were so widely accepted, since the belief that terrible disasters are coming seems frightening. He theorized that there should be 'cognitive dissonance' arising from the experience of having survived a devastating earthquake in which other people had perished. The rumors, he reasoned, gave the survivors something to be frightened about. This was reassuring for them in a way! That is, since the rumors provided them with information that fit with the way they already felt, the rumors were anxiety-justifying and dissonance-reducing instead of anxiety-provoking, he theorized.