College students who have examinations the subsequent day might pull an 'all-nighter' in which they sacrifice sleep for one complete night of exam preparation. A study measured the sleep habits of 111 students to see if there was a correlation between getting regular sleep and student grades. Those who skipped a night of sleep to study for a test were found to achieve lower grades than those who did not stay up. It may seem that the conclusion from this study is that 'pulling an all-nighter' will cause students to attain low grades, however that constitutes a common scientific mistake.
The mistake was to erroneously interpret the results as demonstrating cause and effect. Unfortunately for the prospects of testing causal claims about sleep deprivation and exam performance, the original study used a quasi-experimental design, where no experimental manipulation was performed. The finding indicates that getting less sleep is correlated with getting lower grades yet does not support the claim that getting less sleep causes lower grades. Correlations can only lead to conclusions about the strength of relationships between variables: we cannot use correlation alone to infer the direction of influence between the variables.
Suppose that we have strong evidence that there is a relationship between two variables, and that it is a plausibly causal relationship. Given the plausibly causal relationship between X and Y, what are the cause and effect constructs (the intervening variables) involved in the relationship? This leads to a type of validity concerned with the psychological qualities contributing to the relationship between X and Y, known as construct validity. Some researchers argue that assessing construct validity ideally depends on two processes: (a) the testing for a 'convergence' across different measures or manipulations of the same behavior, and (b) the testing for a 'divergence' between measures or manipulations of related but conceptually distinct behaviors.
Imagine developing a new test of sensitivity to nonverbal cues that assessed people's ability to read other people's emotions from still photographs. We would want it to correlate with other tests of sensitivity to nonverbal cues. If it did correlate, we would have achieved convergent validity. However, we would not want our new test to correlate very highly with a standard IQ test. If it did correlate highly, it could be argued that what we had developed was simply a measure of intelligence. That result would argue for poor discriminant validity. We want our measures to correlate highly with the measures that our theory says they should correlate highly with, but much less with the measures our theory says they should not correlate so highly with.
