Good scientific practice is more, of course, than an exercise in deliberate observation and the use of adequate control groups to expose and assess bias. Whether a program of research will 'pay off' by casting new light on some difficult problem or perplexing aspect of behavior will also depend on the quality of the scientist's research ideas, or hypotheses. The scientist views facts not as isolated or separate entities or events, but as meaningfully connected. The scientist's hypotheses are the starting points for approaching this sort of connectedness, by making a theoretical guess as to the significance or meaning of a given fact.
Any research project begins with selecting and narrowing the question originally asked, to make it manageable for study within the available resources. Extensive preparation is crucial. The literature should be carefully reviewed, and the task should be thought about at length. One must select the most fundamental elements that will constitute the crux of the hypotheses. A classic principle of this intellectual ruminative and winnowing process is known as Occam's razor, named after the philosopher William of Occam. The principle of Occam's razor, also called the principle of parsimony, teaches that hypotheses introduced to explain relationships should be as parsimonious as possible. We 'cut away' what is superfluous. Occam's razor is a qualified demand for prudence so that we do not overcomplicate the search for truth.
College students who have examinations the subsequent day might pull an 'all-nighter' in which they sacrifice sleep for one complete night of exam preparation. A study measured the sleep habits of 111 students to see if there was a correlation between getting regular sleep and student grades. Those who skipped a night of sleep to study for a test were found to achieve lower grades than those who did not stay up. It may seem that the conclusion from this study is that 'pulling an all-nighter' will cause students to attain low grades, however that constitutes a common scientific mistake.
The mistake was to erroneously interpret the results as demonstrating cause and effect. Unfortunately for the prospects of testing causal claims about sleep deprivation and exam performance, the original study used a quasi-experimental design, where no experimental manipulation was performed. The finding indicates that getting less sleep is correlated with getting lower grades yet does not support the claim that getting less sleep causes lower grades. Correlations can only lead to conclusions about the strength of relationships between variables: we cannot use correlation alone to infer the direction of influence between the variables.
