Suppose that we have strong evidence that there is a relationship between two variables, and that it is a plausibly causal relationship. Given the plausibly causal relationship between X and Y, what are the cause and effect constructs (the intervening variables) involved in the relationship? This leads to a type of validity concerned with the psychological qualities contributing to the relationship between X and Y, known as construct validity. Some researchers argue that assessing construct validity ideally depends on two processes: (a) the testing for a 'convergence' across different measures or manipulations of the same behavior, and (b) the testing for a 'divergence' between measures or manipulations of related but conceptually distinct behaviors.
Imagine developing a new test of sensitivity to nonverbal cues that assessed people's ability to read other people's emotions from still photographs. We would want it to correlate with other tests of sensitivity to nonverbal cues. If it did correlate, we would have achieved convergent validity. However, we would not want our new test to correlate very highly with a standard IQ test. If it did correlate highly, it could be argued that what we had developed was simply a measure of intelligence. That result would argue for poor discriminant validity. We want our measures to correlate highly with the measures that our theory says they should correlate highly with, but much less with the measures our theory says they should not correlate so highly with.
Once we establish the validity of our construct, we must ask 'how generalizable is the causal relationship between X and Y across persons, settings, and times?' External validity refers to the generalizability of a relationship beyond the circumstances under which it is observed by the scientist, or outside the controlled setting of a laboratory. Internal validity refers to whether the relationship between the variables is free of confounds. If a construct has both external and internal validity we can say it has inferential validity. Given a high degree of internal and external validity, we may legitimately make generalizations.
To illustrate a possible threat to external validity, research suggests subjects who volunteer as research participants are more responsive to coercive task-orienting cues than nonvolunteer participants. This has serious consequences for psychological research that uses primarily volunteers. For example, many studies on 'fear appeals' use volunteer subjects. These are messages that are intended to arouse emotional tensions. Subjects were more likely to be persuaded by the fear appeal the more threatening it was. These results might be lacking in external validity due to the use of volunteers. In real life we are exposed to all sorts of fear appeals whether we choose to be subjected to them or not. Perhaps we learn to ignore some in real life.