College students who have examinations the subsequent day might pull an 'all-nighter' in which they sacrifice sleep for one complete night of exam preparation. A study measured the sleep habits of 111 students to see if there was a correlation between getting regular sleep and student grades. Those who skipped a night of sleep to study for a test were found to achieve lower grades than those who did not stay up. It may seem that the conclusion from this study is that 'pulling an all-nighter' will cause students to attain low grades, however that constitutes a common scientific mistake.
The mistake was to erroneously interpret the results as demonstrating cause and effect. Unfortunately for the prospects of testing causal claims about sleep deprivation and exam performance, the original study used a quasi-experimental design, where no experimental manipulation was performed. The finding indicates that getting less sleep is correlated with getting lower grades yet does not support the claim that getting less sleep causes lower grades. Correlations can only lead to conclusions about the strength of relationships between variables: we cannot use correlation alone to infer the direction of influence between the variables.
Now we will look at an example of experimental design in more detail. Imagine an app designed to help people stop smoking, which is purported to work via subliminal audio messages played to the user whilst they sleep. Although the messages are inaudible because the words are recorded at such low volume, the subliminal messages supposedly get into the user's brain while they sleep and convince them to cut back on smoking. The app developers claim that the app causes people to cut down or quit smoking, mediated by subliminal messages. We can form a hypothesis to test scientifically: that using the app is associated with a reduction in smoking.
Think about what the independent and dependent variables are, and how you would go about designing this experiment. We could simply survey some smokers who use the app and ask them to report whether they stop smoking. However, this is not a good experimental design because we won't know how many smokers who want to stop smoking would do so anyway without the app. We need to ascertain whether more individuals stop smoking after being exposed to the subliminal messages than in a separate control group who also wanted to stop smoking but were not exposed.